---
layout: default
title:  "About 0.4.0"
author: cleber
categories: [ releases ]
tags: [ releases, 0.4 ]
description: "About the 0.4.0 relese"
---

# About 0.4.0

We leaped forward from 0.3 to 0.4 basically because the old
`error.handler` is now `on.error`. I was working on a fix on error handling
and took the liberty of changing the name to reflect a little better that
it's a kind of an *event* handler.

## The fix

The fix itself is an interesting one: ExecLists used to share the same
Process as the caller Command, so the error handler was shared between
them both. That was a problem, because dealing with errors *inside* the
ExecList's SubProgram usually should be done differently than dealing with
errors at the caller scope -- even if, technically, they were sharing the
same scope.

An example:

```tcl
proc on.error (e) {
    print "e: $e"
    return "boom"
}
set x [invalidcommand]
```

As soon as the "command not found" error arises, `on.error` was being
called directly from inside the ExecList. And that's a problem, because
the intuitive way of thinking is that the interpreter would search for
`on.error` **inside** the ExecList's SubProgram and, not finding it, would
simply return as `ExitCode.Failure` and **then** the interpreter would
search again, find it and call it in the "outer" scope. But that wasn't
what was happening, because both `invalidcommand` and `set` were, in this
case, sharing the same Process.


What I did was to create a new Process for each ExecList evaluation, so
the error handler search and `Failure` returns would follow the expected
path.


I find interesting how, by facing this kind of situation, I understand
much better why the POSIX shells do a lot of things the way they do.

## What it "unlocks"

Now the programmer can (i) define an error handler *inside* the ExecList
and (ii) even recover from errors by returning some value if he wants:

```tcl
set x [ 
    proc on.error (e) {
        print "e: $e"
        return "boom"
    }   
    invalidcommand
]
print "x: $x"
```

Also, variables set inside an ExecList do not collide with variables from
the caller scope. Yay! (But if you want to change something from outside,
you can still rely on `uplevel`.)
