---
layout: default
title:  "About Til"
author: cleber
categories: [ editorial ]
tags: [ editorial ]
description: "About Til"
---

# About Til

It's been a very interesting and (mostly) pleasant experience to develop
*yet another programming language* and I believe more programmers should
try that at least once in life. It's **enlightening**.

There are plenty of motivations to create a new language. Some people are
unhappy with the current options and may want to try their own take on the
subject. Some do that for fun. Many may think being the creator of
a programming language will open doors to a bright career. And others just
want to **learn more**.

I just want to learn more and, yes, I am learning. I now know D and some
of its ecosystem much better than before, I understand a lot of decisions
from other languages I thought were weird (like "connecting" into
processes when using Erlang shell, for example) and, specially, I'm
starting to experience **the human side** of this new language thing: some
people excited about the project, others are skeptical and I've got even
some *detractors*

You see, it's not only about technical stuff, but also about people's
**expectations**. And that's a very interesting learning path.

## Expectations

I could say I'm a "Python guy". I really enjoy dynamic languages and all
the power they give to programmers. And I also like to learn new languages
so that I can have a better perspective about all possible ways to achieve
some objectives.

Do you want the language to be lightweight and simple? Does it have to be
extensible with C? Does it have to be written in C? You want few keywords?
Or lots of keywords? Big standard library? Or no standard library at all?
Well, there's a language for each case and many more.

But when you start something new, it's kind of natural that people project
their own desires into the not yet fully shaped project and start
expecting many different things, so all of sudden there are people
**really** expecting that, for instance, Til is going to be "fast" or even
saying that "*if it is not fast, what is the point?*".

So I think it's better for everyone if I, the dictator-for-life of the
language, write down what **I** expect of this project.

## What I expect

### An implementation that is easy to understand

I've been working with Python for a reasonable time, now, and curiously
**I never touched any CPython code**. Maybe because it has more than 65K
LOC (I'm trying to count only the main part, not stdlib), maybe because
it's written in C or maybe because the project is now so big (in many
aspects) that (i) it feels a little unapproachable and (ii) my help kind
of seems... unnecessary.

And I don't like this situation. I would love to understand better how
this language I like so much is implemented and runs and do everything it
does. But I always feel somewhat overwhelmed.

**Also, I'm lazy.**

Another language I learned to love is **Tcl**. It's such a pleasure to
write some programs in Tcl! Also, the development pacing of the language
itself is slow and, man, **that's awesome**. You can write your program
confident that a new major release is not coming in the next five to ten
years - the *ecosystem stability* feeling is amazing. And the language is
really simple (**simple** and effective, not *stupid* as Golang), to the
point where coming back to any old project is... easy! That's not
something I can say even of Python (but, of course, YMMV).

The official Tcl implementation is also written in C and has around 80K
LOC (counting "generic" and "unix" folders inside Tcl8.6.10). The code is
much easier to read, IMHO, than CPython, and you can also study `jimtcl`
code or even `picol` to understand it more if you want less lines of code
to scan through.

Being more approachable is nice. It gives you the impression of something
that is human made, not brought to you by some distant gods. I feel a bit
more invested in Tcl than in Python, now, because **for me**, Tcl
implementation code seems much easier to understand - although I don't
consider the language itself to be "better than Python" (actually, I have
mixed feeling about it).

So I expect that Til become a **very** approachable language. First,
because it's implemented in D, not C, and D is a very nice language, with
code generally being much easier to understand than C.

Til is in a almost usable state right now and it has still **less than 4K
LOC**. I hope the codebase will remain small so that people will find it
easy to grasp.


And that's a clear objective. Any trickery intended to speed up execution
**won't** be included if that makes the code hard to read or reason about.
Yes, I also enjoy using a fast language, but I'd rather have a codebase
that is friendly and accessible to new programmers.

### Code that is easy to understand

I decided to create a "command language" because I find them usually easy
to read and reason about.

The exceptions, of course, are "obscure bash things", that I'll avoid for
obvious reasons.

I don't want to fill the code with too many "symbols". I'm walking
in a thin line, here, since Tcl itself has, in my opinion, **too few**
symbols (and that's the rationale behind the Extraction syntax), but
I also don't want to resolve any problem in the *yet another one* way.

Also, whenever I feel necessary, I'm relying on *familiarity*: if
I **need** to use a symbol, I'll be trying to make it feel "natural" (if
there's such a thing in our work), like the "spawn" alternative, `&`.

```tcl
# Using `spawn`:
set p1 [spawn procedure_1]

# Using `&`:
set p2 [procedure_1 &]
```

(The later is better in this case because `procedure_1` will be
instantiated as a Command from the beginning, while `spawn` must collect
the name and create a new Command by itself.)

### Code that is easy to manage

Code is not only written, but also managed: by yourself, by your team, by
other project contributors. It's going to be subject to review and "pull
requests" and diffs and validation and whatever. And that's why I try to
avoid giving too much *freedom of style*.

For instance: **line continuations**. They don't follow the "mainstream"
thread of "escaping the \n", putting a `\` at the end of each line.
I never liked this thing, because programmers sometimes feel forced to
**align** them. And, as you may have noticed, line continuation tokens
live in the worst part of the line: the end.

So a code piece that was born this way:

```tcl
set a [a_command \
    with a lot \
    of arguments \
    like really a lot \
    of them \
    ]
```

may end this way:

```tcl
set a [a_command      \
    with a lot        \
    of arguments      \
    like really a lot \
    of them           \
    ]
```

Why? Because people are strange.

And some funny guy would even try to make **this** pass, just for fun:

```tcl
set a [a_command   \
    with a lot      \
    of arguments     \
    like really a lot \
    of them            \
    ]
```

But the fact remains: **it's weird and unintuitive**. Should programmers
say "*this line is going to be continued*"? I believe it's easier to think
in terms of "*this line is the continuation of the preceding one*". And,
by using a smart syntatic trick, one can even make the whole piece of code
**seem** like one singular thing:

```tcl
set a [
    a_command
    . with a lot
    . of arguments
    . like really a lot
    . of them
]
```

It's much easier on the eyes and now there's no blanks at all in the end
of each line. And there shouldn't be problems in deciding how to indent:
just use always **4 spaces** for each level and don't try to spare
a newline after the opening bracket.

### Ease to write a compiled module

Writing a Tcl extension nowadays feel really easy, and writing a module
for Til should be even easier than that.

By using D instead of C, it's already more pleasant in most of the cases,
but I would like also to provide a "cookiecutter" template to make things
**really** trivial - I really want people to rely on compiled modules
instead of writing *everything* in Til. The language should only be the
interface for more complex code written in a more rich and mature
language.

### Ease of deploy

And **this** deserves a whole new post...

---

And that's it. I think.
