# Classes and objects

Well, maybe not the way most people would expect, but *yes*, we **can**
call Til's `type` system "OOP", although the language is not *oriented*
towards objects, necessarily, you know...

What we have now is a way to define new types in Til and give them some
custom **methods**.

All types "inherit" from *some* other previously existing type. And since
most people are very much used to having *attributes* in their objects,
I believe the vast majority of "classes" will inherit from `dict`.

What makes me happy is that, in order to implement this
classes-and-inheritance system, **nothing was changed in the language**.
Actually, every native type was already a form of class/object, since they
could implement their own commands.

I'll explain.

Let's say you have two values, `s` and `d`, being `s` a string and `d`
a dictionary. Like this:

```tcl
set s "x"
set d [dict]
```

If you use the command `set` again with `s`, you would be using the
*generic* `set` command:

```tcl
set $s 10
# Now `x` is 10
print $x
# 10
```

But using `set` **with a dict**, you would be using a `dict` "method":

```tcl
set $d (key "the-value")
print <$d key>
# the-value
```

So, as you can see, native types already behaved as objects, having their
own specific methods. There was already a mechanism to make this work.
Then all I had to do was to create a new command that would execute some
`SubProgram` and overwrite the returned value (or "object")
methods/commands list (`.commands` attribute, internally).

Of course, I had to provide some way for the user code to still access
"methods" from the inherited type, so every time you instantiate a new
object, Til copies all original methods into versions prefixed with
`base.`.

The end result is something like this:

```tcl
type vehicle {
    proc init (wheels_count) {
        return [dict (wheels_count $wheels_count) (engine_status off)]
    }
    proc turn_on (self) {
        base.set $self (engine_status on)
        print "Engine on!"
    }
}

set one_wheeler [vehicle 1]
set bike [vehicle 2]
set car [vehicle 4]

turn_on car
# Engine on!
```

As you can imagine, `init` is the constructor and should return an
instance of the "base type" (I'll probably make this method *optional* in
the future and make types inherit from `dict` by default, probably). It
receives some parameters, just like constructors usually do, so that you
can initialize a base object properly.

Other methods always receive the object itself as the first argument. It's
**not** something coming from Python, but instead is a fruit of that
generic versus specific commands system I mentioned before: whatever the
way your command is called, it can expect the same arguments to be present
at the stack.

Notice the `base.set` being called. In this case, it's not mandatory,
since the `vehicle` type does not overwrite `set` - but it seems a good
practice to call the prefixed version nonetheless. Good code is code that
works now and is forever modifiable, right?

I'm calling the first argument `self` because it helps me to be aware
that, although I could think in terms of the base object, I should always
remember that all of its methods might be overwritten.

And that's it for now. I was hesitant about the best approach to this but
in the end I believe everything went very well. I liked the end result
very much.
