# About 0.14.0

I'm excited to announce that the 0.14.0 version is out with a lot of
interesting new features. And since I didn't posted a thing about "older"
versions since 0.8, I'll mention some features that shipped with them,
too:

## Custom types

Custom types are our way of doing what I'll call "PUOHT" (_programming
using objects here and there_) and now it's easier to make them behave
almost like native objects. The following methods are now available:

* `extract`
* `to.string`
* `operate`

This way you have much more freedom to implement your objects without
relying on ugly shortcuts like `sum $myobject 10 ` or `print [to_string
$myobject]` or worse.

## Scopes and context managers

A feature whose implementation feels very natural after you have custom
types is _context managers_. I drew inspiration from Python and now you
can write this kind of thing in Til:

```tcl

type logger {
    proc init (name) {
        print "logger for `$name` was instantiated."
        return $name
    }
    proc open (name) {
        print "$name: starting..."
    }
    proc close (name) {
        print "$name: closed."
    }
}

scope "test the logger" {
    with l [logger "teste"]
    print "sleeping..."
    sleep 1
}
```

The result would be:

```
logger for `teste` was instantiated.
teste: starting...
sleeping...
teste: closed.
```

The `scope` command is going to help me implement better test suites (when
an `assert` fails it can also display the scope name, for instance) and
work this way:

* variables are shared with outer scope;
* anything else isn't.

Now the `with` command acts almost like `set`, in the sense that it
creates a new variable in the scope, but it also **immediately** calls the
`open` method, while the `close` method is called when the scope ends.

This combination of `scope` and `with` solves a problem I discussed some
months ago with `dumblob`: nested context managers. In Python they are
kind of a pain in the ass, since you easily ends with too much indentation
or some horrible giant lines. In Til, the number of managers for a context
has "vertical influence" only: it's not going to act in the horizontal
axis of your code -- and you can even *instantiate* them outside of the
scope if you feel the need to.

(And all this is going to make my life much easier when I start working
with the file system and sockets.)

## Strings

**Now we have regexes.**

Of course, in a very early stage, but at least you don't have to rely so
heavily on `exec`.

See (and run) `examples/regex.til`.

Also, one can iterate over each character of a string, now, using the
`range` method, and insert some *special characters*, like `\n` or `\t`.

I still want the code for Til to be **very** easy to read, so I'm always
trying to keep it small. Special characters in strings (and strings in
general) have this tendency to need a lot of code, so I'm not planning on
expanding too much on this special characters list, but simply allowing
the insertion of chars by hexadecimal or "\u" notation.

## Environment variables and command line arguments

Your program now has access to `$env` (containing the process environment
variables) and `$args` (containing the command line arguments).

## Skip!

There's both `ExitCode.Skip` and the command `skip`, so that your ranges
(or `transform`) can ask for whoever is consuming it to skip this
iteration because there's nothing really interesting to "yield".

## Ranges

The `range` method for SimpleLists now has a sibling, `range.enumerate`,
that acts like the `enumerate` function from Python, returning both the
index and the item on each iteration.

There's also the `zip` command to "zip" multiple ranges together.

## NO MORE AUTOMATIC PRECEDENCE!!!

**That** was a hard decision to make, but that still makes some sense:
math and logic operations don't apply precedence automatically anymore.
I'm well aware of the potential to put off a lot of people, but this has
**two** advantages:

1. It makes the `math` code **so much** easier to understand;
1. If the user can overwrite `operate`, maybe the precedence is not aways
   a good thing.

So, now that you can implement different behaviors for `+` and `*` in your
custom type, maybe forcing `*` to happen always before `+` is not an
interesting behavior...

I was thinking about implementing automatic precedence in `math`, but
I believe it would be very confusing to see it working in some places
(`math` calls) and **not** working in others (`if` calls, for example).

But, notice, `&&` and `||` precedence still apply for logic evaluations!

*Anyway*, **precedence is crazy**. If you look how we do it in the real
world you clearly can see it would never fit a computerized operation much
easily, right?
